### Three steps toward net zero

**Progressing toward net zero** winds through three phrases: establishing a baseline, defining a pathway, and then overseeing implementation and tracking.

#### Baseline and value at stake

The first step determines the actual greenhouse gas (GHG) baseline generated by a company’s value chain. Scope 1 emissions can often be measured relatively easily at the plant level, either via sensor-generated data or through emission-calculation models. Likewise, Scope 2 emissions are a function of the electricity, heat, cooling, and steam the company purchases, which generally come with specific emission factors that can allow for fairly easy calculation. Consolidating this data across tens or hundreds of plants and office locations can still be a challenge, however.

Measuring Scope 3 emissions that cover the whole value chain outside of a company’s own operations is a more complex task. The GHG Protocol defines 15 emission categories, including purchased goods and services, capital goods, up- and downstream transportation and distribution, and the use (or end of life) of sold products. Gathering the required activity data (typically at transaction level, such as spend or shipment records), as well as the appropriate emission factors, can be a significant effort.

Once the baseline is defined, companies benefit from a clear articulation of the value at stake associated with these emissions. Areas to explore include the required abatement or offsetting costs, the regulatory and customer-sentiment risks, and the opportunities from lower-carbon portfolio and business-model shifts, or the savings associated with more efficient—and hence lower—carbon use of input materials, such as packaging or energy. The value at stake from improved environmental, social, and governance (ESG) practices in general, of which greenhouse gas–related effects often take the lion’s share, can be significant: for financial, automotive, and technology companies, for example, we estimate that [50 to 60 percent of earnings before income and taxes may be at risk from increased social and regulatory pressure to improve ESG performance](https://www.mckinsey.com/capabilities/strategy-and-corporate-finance/our-insights/five-ways-that-esg-creates-value). 

#### Pathway and target definition, and program setup

Once the baseline and value at stake are clear, it comes down to defining the right decarbonization target and a realistic pathway to reach it. Depending on the industry, the first third of the decarbonization journey can be net-present-value positive, saving money while reducing emissions at the same time. These measures may include packaging- and waste-reduction efforts, shifts to renewable energy, logistics optimization, and the like. While the operational changes required to reduce Scope 1 and Scope 2 emissions are within the control of the company, Scope 3 can be tackled only by collaborating with customers and suppliers. In line with a realistic pathway, companies will want to set formal decarbonization targets to document their commitment for customers, investors, and the public.

#### Implementation and tracking

Initiative implementation will typically happen within the different business areas or functions, led by an overarching program-steering and initiative-tracking mechanism. Factories work on the reduction of fugitive emissions, energy consumption, and waste. Procurement addresses renewable-electricity sourcing and the cascading of decarbonization targets to suppliers—often linked to supplier-development and collaboration efforts designed to help partners achieve the targets. R&D will work on reduced-carbon product designs, while sales will steer and influence customers to lower-carbon products.